---
layout: post
category: icanscience
title:  "Dr Lilliam Casilla, Microbiolgist and Teacher"
date:   2019-02-03
excerpt: "When you teach and you see the eyes of the kids, how they light up when you teach them something ,that is new that they have never seen before, it is a spectacular. You get a feeling that, oh wow, this is great because you are passing knowledge to new kids and to new generation. So for me, I feel extraordinary. I feel great."
image: "/images/lilliam-students.png"
comments: true
---


<iframe width="1024" height="512" src="https://ucdavis.app.box.com/s/3vslpzsto8pb3n6uhwv15jnmyigzf0ap/file/492571723963" frameborder="0" marginwidth="0" marginheight="0" scrolling="no" seamless allowfullscreen></iframe>


_Being a scientist is the best career I can imagine. But becoming a scientist took a lot of hard work and your path may not be a straight line. Mine definitely wasn't. I can. Science is a show that takes you into the world of some of the coolest scientists ever. You'll hear how they got started and see the incredible things they get to do. Let's face it, we can science, and you can science too._

I am Lilliam Casillas. I am a professor of microbiology at the University of Puerto Rico in Humacao. I teach, but then I also do research in the search for antibiotics from microorganisms from different locations in the island.

Lilium search for new antibiotics is crucial at a time when bacterial infections are becoming harder and sometimes even impossible to treat. The work Lilliam and her students are doing could unearth new, undiscovered antibiotics that could help solve this problem and save millions of lives.

When I became a scientist, initially I was trained only as research. As time goes on, I learned that I can do both. I can do research and also teach at the same time. What I decided to do is to bring my research to the laboratory. About how many bacteria are living in here? Millions and millions and millions in a quarter inch. They said that a centimeter of this is similar to a meter of the rainforest in terms of diversity. You have a lot of diversity here. Yeah. It's a tiny little rainforest. It's a little world. They are little. They are very little microcosms, so I'm going to show them to you. I took some samples and grew different bacteria with different colors. I feel like I'm ready to go make some discoveries. Lilliam called me over because we've got some live cyanobacteria.

For me, science is a platform that I can use to provoke in the island a social reform that we really need right now. In Puerto Rico, girls are never attracted to science. We tend to become teachers or do other kinds of professions. With this new project that I have, thanks to HHMI, I am trying to bring these girls into science and allure them to follow science careers. We're science-ing with Puerto Rican bacteria.

We have cyanos and algae all together here, beautiful. If you love what you do, you do it. And you love what you do? I do. I love what I do and I love teaching and I love these kids and I know that it's a great teacher for them. Lilium isn't just working to solve one of humanity's biggest health problems. She's striving to fix one of science's biggest people problems. Through her efforts, she is making microbiology a more welcoming place for women to find their paths to becoming scientists because right now we need all hands on deck, or really, in Petri dishes, to ensure a healthier tomorrow.