---
layout: post
category: icanscience
title:  "Dr Patti Ordóñez-Franco, Data Scientist"
date:   2019-02-04
excerpt: "The majority of women are in the biology department and in our department we're lacking women, right? It's like 60% women in biology, and 15% in computer science. The idea was, if we got more biologists into computers, we might get more women and it would balance out. You saw the class that I taught that introduction to computer science. It's the first time we have more women than men."
image: "/images/patti.png"
comments: true
---

A lot of times people are put off from science because you think you can't get an A and you tend to like the things they do well in. You do well in math, you like math. If you do well in English, you like English. Science takes a little bit more work, and I hadn't really put in that work to get the A's in high school. Once I did, it felt possible, and when it feels possible, you start to see everything that you can learn for science. It's very compelling and it makes you want to do more.

<iframe width="1024" height="512" src="https://ucdavis.app.box.com/s/3vslpzsto8pb3n6uhwv15jnmyigzf0ap/file/492565628162" frameborder="0" marginwidth="0" marginheight="0" scrolling="no" seamless allowfullscreen></iframe>


_Being a scientist is the best career I can imagine. But becoming a scientist took a lot of hard work and your path may not be a straight line. Mine definitely wasn't. I can. Science is a show that takes you into the world as some of the coolest scientists ever. You'll hear how they got started and see the incredible things they get to do. Let's face it, we can science and you can science too._

My name is Patti Ordóñez-Franco. I am an associate professor at the University of Puerto Rico Río Piedras in the Department of Computer Science. So tell me what is data science? It's a way of solving complex problems using math, statistics and programming in an interdisciplinary team. All right, so then if there were one data science problem that you could solve.. You know what I would love to solve, I would love to solve increasing women in computer science. Okay, well it sounds like you've already started doing that. I have. I'm trying.

That's what you guys have to do for the next class. A little known fact about Patti, years ago, she got her first taste of the power of computing working attempt job as a receptionist. She learned how to use the computer system so well that it inspired her to go back to school to learn more about how to code and program. However, she couldn't help but notice that most of her classmates and teachers were men. Where were all the women?

The majority of women are in the biology department and in our department we're lacking women, right? So it's like 60% women in biology, and we are like 15% maybe, a tops. And so the idea was if we got more biologists into computers, we might get more women and it would balance out. You saw the class that I taught that introduction to computer science. It's the first time we have more women than men. And how were you able to do that? Well, for one thing, we, we did these programs to kind of recruit them. So we did like we did design thinking. The other thing we did was I think it makes a difference to have a female professor. It definitely makes a difference, absolutely. One piece of advice for our viewers out there that are thinking about going into data science, especially women? I would say don't let others define you.

You define yourself. In terms of defining yourself, a lot of times as a woman, people want to tell you what you should do, right? They want to tell you, hey, I don't think you're a phd, or I don't think you have the aptitude to do computer science. I don't think you have the aptitude for programming. You have to decide what you want to do and go for it, and you decide if it's for you or not, but you can't let others tell you what to do. I was told I wasn't going to be a good faculty member. Who told you that? What's their address?

In the digital age, that these work is essential to having more women programmers means bringing more perspectives to the table. Or... I guess in this case, the computer, which means better problem solving, having access to the right data at the right time in the right way can save lives. Now that's something to dance about.