---
layout: post
category: icanscience
title:  "Karina Tañon-De Jesús, Electrical Engineer"
date:   2019-02-02
excerpt: "Un radiotelescopio en el Observatorio de Arecibo en Arecibo, Puerto Rico, se hizo famoso por la película Contact en 1997. Todavía es uno de los telescopios más grandes e importantes en la actualidad, pero fue dañado por el huracán. Karina Tañon-De Jesús y un equipo de investigadores universitarios de la Universidad de Puerto Rico Mayagüe construyen drones que sobrevuelan el telescopio y detectan daños en los paneles de aluminio."
image: "/images/karina.png"
comments: true
---


Wow. That's, that's beautiful. It just gives me chills. What's that word again? Escalofríos. Escalofríos. Something like that. Yeah, you got it. You're too nice. You've worked so hard. Yes. There are so many things that have happened in your life. Yeah, sometimes I thought that I was not going to make it, but then I made it. This is amazing. Science is lucky to have you. I am lucky to have science in my life. Okay. Sorry. Shall we begin the science talk? Okay.

<iframe width="1024" height="512" src="https://ucdavis.app.box.com/s/3vslpzsto8pb3n6uhwv15jnmyigzf0ap/file/492566690148" frameborder="0" marginwidth="0" marginheight="0" scrolling="no" seamless allowfullscreen></iframe>


_Being a scientist is the best career I can imagine, but becoming a scientist took a lot of hard work, and your path may not be a straight line. Mine definitely wasn't. I Can Science is a show that takes you into the world as some of the coolest scientists ever. You'll hear how they got started and see the incredible things they get to do. Let's face it, we can science and you can science too._


Today we are at the Arecibo Observatory in Arecibo, Puerto Rico to see one of the world's largest radio telescopes and meet Karina Tañon-De Jesús, a student who has been helping to design a system for maintaining one of the world's largest and most important telescopes. Karina has been working diligently with her team for over a year to develop a drone that could fly over the dish receiver and detect damaged aluminium panels or, literally, a disturbance in the force.

Hi, my name is Karina Tañon-De Jesús. I am an electrical engineering student at the University of Puerto Rico Mayagüez. We as human beings have these kinds of barriers. We want to exceed the barriers, we want to go over them and create this world where we are going to be able to do many amazing things. This trip has been amazing. It has been everything I needed, maybe not everything I wanted. I realized that I needed to face some obstacles and things to be here. One of the biggest ones was leaving my family. Leaving my family was hard because I really enjoy having time with my siblings, but they understood. They have always supported me and they are always there for me.

We want to go to the moon. We want to go to Mars. We need science and engineering to do that. We need to study the terrain of the planet. We need to create to engineer the rocket that is going to get the stars. So that's, that's important. I actually used the team that I was going to end up with something related to the sky and clouds because that's something that I enjoy. This is one of my hobbies and little did I know that I was going to be studying antennas and the way that the waves propagate through space. I didn't imagine I was going to be working can here. Just like an ordinary telescope, a radio telescope lets you magnify distant objects, but in this case it uses a specialized antenna and radio dish receiver to detect radio waves from outer space like pulsars and colliding black holes and maybe, just maybe, extraterrestrial intelligence.

So what is this, this ball or this leaf shape of power do? Why do we care so much? With this research, we can know when we need more power or if we need to replace something in here that is not working correctly. So engineering generally, there's not a lot of women in engineering and here you are. How does it feel? It's challenging to be in a room where it has happened to me that I have an idea and I know it's going to work. I mean I had seen it work before, but the guys they are like, no, it's not going to work and they are not going to try it. I will say, well, I will let them go ahead do your thing. I am, I know I'm right and then I can wait for my turn and shove it in their face. I'm sorry; I don't like it. I am not going to go ahead and tell you. It's going to be easy now. It's going to be hard, but it's going to be lovely. You're going to learn and you're going to grow. You're going to to meet amazing people. And if it's something that you really, really love, you keep working hard and you can do it.


