---
layout: post
category: icanscience
title:  "S1E1: Dr Amelia Merced"
date:   2019-02-05
excerpt: "Botanist and Neuroscientist"
image: "/images/amelia.png"
comments: true
---


My mom is one of the most inspirational people in my life, really, because even with my sister and I, she was able to study and get a doctorate, get a phd in botany and that's something amazing to me.


<iframe width="1024" height="512" src="https://ucdavis.app.box.com/s/3vslpzsto8pb3n6uhwv15jnmyigzf0ap/file/492571698456" frameborder="0" marginwidth="0" marginheight="0" scrolling="no" seamless allowfullscreen></iframe>


My name is Emilia Marcet. I am a biologist. I spell the plants, but recently I've been working in neuroscience looking at fruit flies.

_Being a scientist is the best career I can imagine. But becoming a scientist took a lot of hard work and your path may not be a straight line. Mine definitely wasn't. I Can Science is a show that takes you into the world as some of the coolest scientists ever. You'll hear how they got started and see the incredible things they get to do. Let's face it, we can science and you can science too._

Amelia works at the prestigious institute of Neurobiology located in old San Juan. Like so many of us, Amelia's path to becoming a scientist was not a straight line. Although she began her career as a botanist, her exceptional microscopy skills earned her a postdoc position, here, studying the connections between brains and motor functions in fruit flies. Everyday she commutes to one of Puerto Rico's most beautiful ocean front spot. Just steps from el Morro road, the fortress built in the 16th century to protect the island from enemy attacks.

I grew up here in Puerto Rico. When I was growing up, I never met a scientist. Through my teachers, I learned that there is a path if you want to do science, you have to learn to learn in science. You need to learn to adapt and you need to learn to be comfortable with the things you don't know. I remember all my childhood who have been playing outside and through that playing was where I discovered that I wanted to ask questions and do investigation. So for me it was that idea of discovery and exploration. What really drives me. 

So when the hurricane Maria came, this is my house, this is where we were. So the door we had it closed and it was just shaking, shaking, shaking like, do you know the whole horror movies when you say like that? So I took my kids and then we move to to my room here to the back. Yeah. So here, this is where, where we spend most of the hurricane. How long, how long were you in here for? A lot of hours. Like the three of you. We were like so tired. I don't know if it was the pressure or what happened to, to our body though. We were just sleeping. Yeah, it was like little together. They're teenagers.

So, after the hurricane, we didn't had any cell phone reception. We had no electricity. And, we can not sit down. Oh wait, nobody came to help. I was just on us helping each other. I cried every day that I come to work. Like for over a week. Every week morning I got in my car and you know you're driving and you only seen the destruction that is around all the people that lost their houses. People that lost their families, you know people with medical conditions that couldn't go to a hospital or couldn't get help. That was like every day I was like, I can not believe this is happening. You know the island that I love so much that is this badly destroyed. It was like a nuclear bomb exploded and there was nothing, but then you look the people and they were working and they were doing things and they were like not giving up and you're like, I'm not giving up either. 

So this is the only trail right now open to the public. Why is that? Well, because after the year again, there was so much devastation and the canopy open many trees for the trees, not the branches and the leaves. That's why you could only see the trunks. They had a big impact in the entire forest because first of all the shape was gone, so that allowed a lot of other plants to come up the forest. Now we see it again. It's green.

If you could have a superpower, what would it be? Time. Manipulate time. I'm like, I'm like the little bunny that is always like, _"I don't have enough time! I know have enough time!"_ That's me. This is the thing that I love the most. So for anybody that wants to take this path, they have to learn to be brave and not be afraid of the unknown.

Emilia may not have the superpower to control time, such gifts or the stuff of myth after all, but if you ask me, I think she has a trait that's a million times more valuable bravery.


